# Under consideration <a name="issues"></a>

for element-grouping, if there is unused space within a register
(3 16-bit elements in a 64-bit register for example), recommend:

* For the unused elements in an integer register, the used element
  closest to the MSB is sign-extended on write and the unused elements
  are ignored on read.
* The unused elements in a floating-point register are treated as-if
  they are set to all ones on write and are ignored on read, matching the
  existing standard for storing smaller FP values in larger registers.

> no, because it wastes space.

---

info register,

> One solution is to just not support LR/SC wider than a fixed
> implementation-dependent size, which must be at least 
>1 XLEN word, which can be read from a read-only CSR
> that can also be used for info like the kind and width of 
> hw parallelism supported (128-bit SIMD, minimal virtual 
> parallelism, etc.) and other things (like maybe the number 
> of registers supported). 

> That CSR would have to have a flag to make a read trap so
> a hypervisor can simulate different values.

----

> And what about instructions like JALR? 

answer: they're not vectorised, so not a problem

---

TODO: document different lengths for INT / FP regfiles, and provide
as part of info CSR register. 00=32, 01=64, 10=128, 11=reserved.

---

Could the 8 bit Register VBLOCK format use regnum<<1 instead, only accessing regs 0 to 64?

--

Expand the range of SUBVL and its associated svsrcoffs and svdestoffs by
adding a 2nd STATE CSR (or extending STATE to 64 bits).  Future version?

--

TODO: evaluate - BRIEFLY (under 1 hour MAXIMUM) - why these rules exist,
by illustrating with pseudo-assembly DAXPY

1. Trap if imm > XLEN.
2. If rs1 is x0, then
    1. Set VL to imm.
3. Else If regs[rs1] > 2 * imm, then
    1. Set VL to XLEN.
4. Else If regs[rs1] > imm, then
    1. Set VL to regs[rs1] / 2 rounded down.
5. Otherwise,
    1. Set VL to regs[rs1].
6. Set regs[rd] to VL.

TODO: adapt to the above rules.

    # a0 is n, a1 is pointer to x[0], a2 is pointer to y[0], fa0 is a
      0:  li t0, 2<<25
      4:  vsetdcfg t0             # enable 2 64b Fl.Pt. registers
    loop:
      8:  setvl  t0, a0           # vl = t0 = min(mvl, n)
      c:  vld    v0, a1           # load vector x
      10:  slli   t1, t0, 3        # t1 = vl * 8 (in bytes)
      14:  vld    v1, a2           # load vector y
      18:  add    a1, a1, t1       # increment pointer to x by vl*8
      1c:  vfmadd v1, v0, fa0, v1  # v1 += v0 * fa0 (y = a * x + y)
      20:  sub    a0, a0, t0       # n -= vl (t0)
      24:  vst    v1, a2           # store Y
      28:  add    a2, a2, t1       # increment pointer to y by vl*8
      2c:  bnez   a0, loop         # repeat if n != 0
      30:  ret                     # return

----

swizzle needs a MV.  see [[mv.x]]

