## We want to:

 - give mass volume appliance manufacturers an alternative to expensive un-auditable chips.
 - maximize the degree of trust a customer can place in their processor. 

## We do this by

 providing the customer the **freedom to study, modify, and redistribute** the full SoC source from HDL and boot loader to down to the VLSI.

## LibreSOC is currently targeting:

 - chromebooks
 - smartphones
 - tablets
 - and industrial boards 

## Our First Product Will Be:

a (quad core, 800mhz, dual issue, GPU, VPU, [and later an ML inference core] ) SOC.

## Why a Libre SOC?

Its quite hard to guarantee that a performant processors (think pipelined, out-of-order) are functionally perfectly correct. In fact, it often turns out that they [aren’t](https://meltdownattack.com).

There are entire [dissertations](http://www.kroening.com/diss/diss-kroe.pdf) dedicated to the subject matter of merely functionally verifying a pipeline (this doesn’t even consider out of order execution).

Given the fact that performant bug-free processors no longer exist, how can you trust your processor? The next best thing is to have access to a processor’s design files. Not only have access to them, you must have the freedom to study and improve them.

Such a processor is referred to as a Libre processor. However, processors themselves are only a part of the picture. Nowadays, most contemporary computing tasks involve artificial intelligence, media consumption, wireless connectivity, etc... Thus, we must deliver an entire LibreSOC.

## Benefits: Privacy, Safety-Critical, Peace of Mind...
Our LibreSOC will not have backdoors that plague modern [processors](https://www.csoonline.com/article/3220476/researchers-say-now-you-too-can-disable-intel-me-backdoor-thanks-to-the-nsa.html).

There is a very real need for reliable safety critical processors (think airplane, smart car, nuclear power plant, pacemaker...).
LibreSOC posits that it is impossible to trust a processor in a safety critical environment without both access
to that processor's source and a cycle accurate HDL simulator that guarantees developers their code behaves as they 
expect. An ISA level simulator is no longer satisfactory.

Refer to this [IEEE article](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4519604) by Cyberphysical System expert Ed-Lee for more details.

## Still Have Questions?

Read about the business and practical benefits of a LibreSOC below.

[[why_a_libresoc]]

See our [[3d_gpu/mission_statement]]
