# NLNet

With many thanks to <http://nlnet.nl> there are six inter-related grants,
documented at the [[nlnet_proposals]] page.

NLNet is a Foundation and so does not have employees or enter into "work
for hire" agreements.  It also will not give money to Corporations
(or, it will, but at a rate which does not include payment of Corporation
insurance, tax etc.): only to Universities, individuals, and other
Foundations.

They have an extremely knowledgeable International Tax Law specialist
who has negotiated tax agreements with most countries in the world and
consequently, subject to your Accountant checking with the law in your
country, donations - and they are charitable donations - are extremely
likely to be 100% tax-deductible.

The process is as follows:

* Proposals are submitted, reviewed, independently audited and (sometimes)
  approved.
* Accepted proposals submit a Project Plan listing a set of milestones,
  each of which has a fixed budget associated with it (note: not an
  hourly rate!)
* The Project Plan becomes part of a Memorandum of Understanding, signed
  by the team (note: not a contract!)
* On 100% completion of tasks *or subtasks* (which must add up ultimately
  to the total allocated budget) after approval by the project leader,
  an rfp (Request for Payment) is submitted by email to nlnet.
* The rfp is paid directly by bank transfer from NLNet
  *not by the Libre-SOC project*

Note that the lack of hourly rate and the lack of contractual obligation
is what enables this to be considered charitable donations.

This lack of contractual obligation also means that if the work is not
done, then there is no penalty (for you). The only thing that happens
is we grumble a bit and have to find someone else to do the work.

It is **your responsibility** to comply with local law and to consult an
Accountant. Your Accountant will be able to confirm the International
Tax Agreements, from the details and/or contact information on NLNet's
website <https://nlnet.nl/foundation/ANBI.html>.  If you are not familiar
with this, or if your Accountant is unfamiliar with International Tax
Agreements, please contact us, and we can put your Accountant in touch
with Bob Goudriaan, the Finance Director of NLnet who specialises in
International Tax Law.  Bob can explain the details to your Accountant;
your Accountant can explain it to you.


# NLNet LibreSOC Top-level

* 2019-02-012 Core <https://bugs.libre-soc.org/show_bug.cgi?id=191>
* 2019-10-043 Wishbone <https://bugs.libre-soc.org/show_bug.cgi?id=175>
* 2019-10-031 Video <https://bugs.libre-soc.org/show_bug.cgi?id=137>
* 2019-10-029 Coriolis2 <https://bugs.libre-soc.org/show_bug.cgi?id=138>
* 2019-10-042 MESA <https://bugs.libre-soc.org/show_bug.cgi?id=140>
* 2019-10-032 Proofs <https://bugs.libre-soc.org/show_bug.cgi?id=158>
* 2019-10-046 Standards <https://bugs.libre-soc.org/show_bug.cgi?id=174>

# NLNet new members onboarding FAQ <a id="faq">

This FAQ is written to assist people in understanding the key difference
between being "financially rewarded with charitable donations" and
"a job / contract / work-for-hire agreement".

* Q: I heard that NLnet is EU funded, I am not in the EU therefore I
  cannot help?
 - A: we get this a lot: it is wrong.  NLnet is quite happy to give 
      donations for work done by people outside of the EU, for the PET
      Programme tasks (<http://nlnet.nl/PET>).  The "Assure" Programme
      is slightly different.
* Q: I work for a company, can my company receive donations?
 - A: of course!  Just bear in mind that NLnet will not pay your employer's
      Corporation Tax contributions (because NLnet is a Charitable 
      Foundation).
* Q: I am from India. Can i receive charitable donations?
 - A: Directly? no you can't!  This is due to a Law in India that
      prohibits India Nationals from directly receiving **any** Charitable
      Donations from Foreigners!  However, "work" turns out to be
      absolutely fine, and if you have a foreign bank account (outside
      of India), that's also fine.  It's transfers to **India** bank
      accounts from Foreign Charities that is prohibited by India Law. 
      There are solutions, basically.
* Q: So I start work on a bug: do I get paid "per hour"?
 - A: No.  NLnet's donations are for "results" (Milestones) not time.
      This avoids NLnet being, for example, qualified under local law
      (e.g. UK IR35) as an "employer" (which would interfere with their
      status and responsibilities as a Charitable Foundation).
* Q: What if I don't complete the work?
 - A: then you can't submit a Request for Payment.
* Q: Are there any penalties or consequences for me if I don't?
 - A: No.  there's no contract (it's a Memorandum of Understanding), so
      no penalties.  You just don't get the associated "gift / donation".
* Q: What if it's a really long task?
 - A: We can (and do) split the (pre-agreed) Milestones into sub-tasks
      in our bugtracker.  The same rules apply: 100% completion is required.
* Q: What if i take a longer or shorter time?
 - A: If it's shorter, great! you still get the same gift/donation (good for
      you!)  If it's longer, then, well, this is really no different from
      having given a "quote" for a job.  If that's really problematic
      we may be able to sort something out.
* Q: So do I pay any tax on what I get paid?
 - A: This is a question that you will have to ask your *Accountant*.  In
     most jurisdictions, Charitable Gifts (which is what NLnet gives you)
     are entirely tax-free, however beyond a certain point some jurisdictions
     might start taxing it.  Bottom line: it is **your** responsibility to
     check with **your** Accountant.  Not ours, and not NLnet's.  We can
     help get you through the "Understanding Hoops" on that however it is
     definitely your responsibility and your responsibility alone.
* Q: What was that about a Memorandum of Understanding?
 - A: Part of NLnet's funding remit (under the EU Horizon 2020
      Programme) and also part of the protection for yourself and for
      them, you will need to be listed as a Project Contributor on the
      associated Grant's MoU.  Note and reinforcement reminder: *this is
      not a contract*, it is simply for the NLnet Foundation's
      "Accountability and Audit trails" and is entirely private.
      Also note that the MoU specifically states (reinforcing the above)
      that you agree that it's your responsibility to contact an Accountant
      and to comply with local Tax Law regarding the donations that you
      receive.
* Q: What about my privacy in that regard?
 - A: NLnet do not give out confidential names and addresses and we
      request that you communicate that information directly to them
      (not to us as Project Leaders or to other Project Members)
* Q: What about Bank Account information for payments, I mean donations
 - A: Again: we request that you pass on the Bank Account information
      directly to NLnet.
* Q: So... you - personally - the other LibreSOC developers - are not
     paying us or involved in payment in any way?
 - A: Correct.  We receive personal charitable donations (gifts) from NLnet,
      just like you would, having first also been added to the MoU.
* Q: This all sounds very odd!  I want to consult my Lawyer!
 - A: Yeah please don't do that, it is Charitable Donations completely
      and utterly wasted for absolutely no good reason. Plus, you are
      asking the wrong expert, unless they are an expert in International
      Finance, specialise in International Tax Agreements, and are
      also a Chartered Accountant, or they are prepared to work
      "Pro-bono".  NLnet is Charitably funding "Works for the Public
      Good".  If you pay your lawyer hundreds to thousands of dollars
      for "advice", that money needs to be replenished in your bank
      account. That means, ultimately, that NLnet, a Charity, is paying
      **your legal costs** to ask a question that **your lawyer** is
      not even qualified to answer, because they are not an **Accountant**!
      Please instead have your **Accountant** review the International
      Tax Agreements that NLnet went to a lot of trouble to set up
      (<https://nlnet.nl/foundation/ANBI.html>) and if your **Accountant**
      does not understand them, have them contact Bob Goudriaan directly.
      Bob can explain it to your **Accountant**, your Accountant can explain
      it to you.
* Q: I wanted to ask about "Works for the Public Good".  What does that mean,
     in practical terms?
 - A: It means that our (your) work - must be made available under Libre
      Licenses.  In this project's case we chose the LGPLv3+.
* Q: Do I retain copyright?
 - A: Yes you do however we do ask that you make a "dual-assignment" so
      that we can enter into (non-exclusive, non-transferrable) re-licensing
      agreements to large Corporations that do not like the LGPLv3+.
      Given that you would receive a percentage of a substantial amount
      of money (which will be a donation by that Corporation) there is
      a financial incentive there (licensing deals for GPUs start around
      USD 250,000 for the low-end ones and go up from there).
* Q: What's this about transparency?
 - A: We are funded under NLnet's Privacy and Enhanced Trust Programme
      <https://nlnet.nl/PET>.  The mandate is so that people to be able to
      trust what we are doing, and for independent audits to be able to
      take place.  Therefore, development discussion needs to be under
      resources within our control to record (i.e. not github).  Even the
      IRC channel is logged.
* Q: So I have to record *everything*?
 - A: No, just make sure to use the bugtracker, mailing lists, IRC channel
      gitolite3 and FTP server for general day-to-day *development*.  Not
      your "personal conversations" or (if a Professor for example) your
      Lectures which happen to mention LibreSOC.
* Q: That sounds nerve-wracking!
 - A: This is just how Libre software development is done: entirely publicly!
      There is nothing new here in 30+ years of Libre software development,
      it's just that it's a condition of involvement rather than optional.
      [sotto voice: and to be honest the traffic volume is so high and it's
      of such specialist interest that nobody's going to be looking who isn't
      genuinely interested :) ]
