# Trustable Hardware

> We believe a computer should be safe to use, and this starts with a
> safe processor.

# The Mission

- to provide a libre, secure and transparently developed hybrid CPU VPU
  GPU architecture to the world.
- to maximize the degree of trust a customer or user can place in
  products using our processor designs.
- through significantly reduced product development costs and time to
  market, incentivise mass volume appliance manufacturers to ensure
  that end-users of their products enjoy the same level of access to
  full Board Support Package source code and Reference Designs that
  they have, including for the processor hardware design.
- to disincentivise Tivoisation, the deployment of DRM and other lockout
  techniques that interfere with end-user trust in the products that
  they legitimately own.

To accomplish this we:

- use collaborative techniques
- operate entirely transparently
- invite developers and experts around the world to contribute without NDAs
- invite inventors to contribute relevant patents to patent pools (OIN)

# The Means:

- provide the customer the **freedom to study, modify, and redistribute**
  the full SoC source from HDL and boot loader to down to the VLSI.
- engage in **full transparency** at every level of the development,
  right from the inception through to delivery of silicon.  no exceptions.
- listen to **constructive input** from world-leading industry experts,
  engineers and enthusiasts alike, in real-time, without NDAs creating
  artificial barriers to communication and hampering success.

# The Market:

 - chromebooks
 - smartphones
 - tablets
 - industrial boards
 - single-board computers (like the Raspberry Pi)
 - wearables
 - CV capable flight controller for lightweight drones
 - whatever you want

# The Products:

- our first target (Oct 2020): a single-core dual-issue 180nm 64-bit
  "demo" QFP chip that will also be a saleable product in the "Embedded"
  space (Arduino, STM32F, Ingenic jz4720).
- a full quad core SoC: 800mhz, dual issue, 4-wide FP32, Hybrid CPU /
  GPU / VPU [and later an ML inference core], comparable to the Allwinner
  64 in capability.
- Products based on customer - and client - driven needs and requirements

