# FOSDEM 2022

# Libre/Open Hardware, CAD, Modelling and VLSI Dev Room

TODO:

* write to openhardware dev room mailing list (private archives)
  - DONE 13nov2022.  no response.  assume dead list
  - therefore take responsibility for writing proposal
* write proposal DONE 14nov2022
* submit proposal DONE 14no42022
* contact interested people
  - https://www.crowdsupply.com/great-scott-gadgets/luna
  - danielgrosse
  - openwifi
  - libresilicon
  - opentapeoutdev
  - efabless
  - libre-soc
  - LIP6 / CNRS (coriolis2)
  - apertus <https://www.apertus.org/axiom-ecosystem>

## OHW Devroom Proposal

<https://submission.fosdem.org/submission/devroom>

Title: **Libre/Open Hardware, CAD, Modelling and VLSI Dev Room**

Elaborate description (including possible topics)

- Open Hardware projects
- VLSI ASIC Design and Manufacture
  * Libre/Open DIY Foundries (nanoscale 3D printing)
  * Libre/Open VLSI tools and toolflow
  * Libre/Open VLSI Cell Libraries
  * VLSI Simulation and Verification
- FPGAs
  * Libre/Open FPGA designs
  * FPGA toolchains and Reverse-Engineering
  * FPGA workflow
- VLSI RTL and HDL
  * Advanced and innovative alternative HDL tools
  * Formal Correctness Proofs
  * Testing methodologies
  * Hardware Trust (and how to break it)
- Circuit Design (EDA)
  * Printed circuit board design tools
  * Analog/Digital Circuit simulation
- 3d modeling and analysis
  * Solid modeling tools
  * Meshing, modeling and transforming physical representations
  * Finite element analysis
- 3d printing
  * 3d slicing tools
  * Motor control
- Machine design and integration
  * ECAD/MCAD integration
  * Thermal analysis
  * Wire modeling
- Physical Model Data storage
  * Data representation and optimization
  * Version control in hardware data storage
  * Collaborative and team-based hardware design techniques
  * Building information Modelling

Why does it fit FOSDEM

There has been a lot of progress happening in the last few years regarding
libre/free chip technology. From RISC-V and OpenPOWER to attempts to create
libre/free processes to make your own chips. Various countries have been
catching up and helping and building up their semiconductorr industries,
some even pushing libre/free toolchains. E.g. EU sponsors various projects
to work in this field to create open toolchains. 

Meanwhile others push the boundaries to liberate former closed source toolchains for FPGAs. While an often neglected topic, a lot of work happens by various fantastic players all around the world. We hope to bring some attention to these areas which we basicly all too often take as a given when
using computers or electronics.
We therefore hope to give Open Hardware and their respective toolchains a
small platform, all the way from silicon to PCB.

Note to organisers: we don't mind merging with another devroom (then
helping out), as long as the words "Libre/Open Hardware" are included in
the devroom title, and the VLSI and FPGA topics are included.  NLnet
now sponsors dozens of hardware projects alone, and the google skywater
130nm project with e-fabless has produced a massive new innovative
community that simply did not exist last year.  We are also happy for
other (smaller) devrooms to merge with this one.

Preferred slot: Full Day
