# Open Tape-out

* <https://opentapeout.dev/>
* Jean-Paul Chaput presenting about coriolis2
* Luke Leighton about Libre-SOC
* <https://twitter.com/OTapeout>

# Coriolis2

* by Jean-Paul

# Libre-SOC

by Luke Leighton.  bio:

Luke Kenneth Casson Leighton specialises in Libre Ethical Technology.
He has been using, programming and reverse-engineering computing
devices continuously for 44 years, has a BEng (Hons), ACGI, in Theory
of Computing from Imperial College, and recently put that education to
good use in the form of the Libre-SOC Project: an entirely
Libre-Licensed 3D Hybrid CPU-VPU-GPU based on OpenPOWER. He writes
poetry and has been developing a HEP Physics theory for the past 36
years in his spare time.

## Abstract: Overview of the Libre-SOC Project

The Libre-SOC Project aims to provide a mass-volume processor with
3D and Video capability built-in to the ISA, for use in end-user products
such as smartphones netbooks chromebooks tablets and Industrial SBC/IoT.
It is a massive project, starting small and being developed "smart".

Why it is being created - at all - can be easily guaged by examining
the littering of systematic failures by multiple large Corporations:
Intel Management Engine, Qualcomm leaving 40% of the world's smartphones
vulnerable to hijacking, Apple drive-by WIFI zero-exploits, Supermicro
de-listed from NASDAQ, Huawei, Smartphones shipping by default with
Trojans, and many others.

Efforts to fix this (Fairphone) simply do not go far back enough down
the chain.  Just as Google sees the only solution to Rowhammer to be
to create a Libre/Open LPDDR4 Memory PHY and Controller (because the
existing RTL providers cannot be trusted to solve it properly), we
see the only solution to be to take full responsibility for creating a
suitable full-on Embedded high-end multi-core System-on-a-Chip, done
entirely Libre.

This talk will therefore provide a high-level overview into some of the
technical decisions behind the "why", in order to achieve such a
ridicuously-ambitious goal in a "smarter" (rather than "work harder")
innovative way.

##Open Source ASIC Conference

* https://forms.gle/BdLWdyryLJbj8kY9A
* 

email me with responses to lkcl@lkcl.net if you prefer not to use google forms for privacy reasons: i can enter the responses on your behalf.  note that time and day are radio-buttons not checkboxes.

Survey form

We are thinking about putting together a conference. To help us plan it, please answer the following questions

About you
email address:

If you want to know when we launch the conference, leave us your email. You will only receive a few conference related emails.

What field do you work in?

Computer programming
Verification
RTL/HDL
ASIC
Electronics
Other:

Times and Dates
What would you prefer
4 hour conference from 6pm till 10pm CEST
2 hours 7pm -> 9pm CEST one day then the same again the next day

1st day starts on:
monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday

Conference infrastructure
How should we host it?
gather town
Zoom
Discord
Other:

Content
What should take place?
What types of content would you like to see?
Panel discussion
30 minute presentations
10 minute lightning talks
demos

What areas should we cover
Next Google sponsored shuttle
OpenLANE ASIC flow - digital tools
Analog tooling
Verification
Security
Process Design Kit (PDK)
Results from the previous Google sponsored shuttle
Other:

Price
We are thinking of using gathertown to host the conference, which has a cost of between $6 and 12 per user depending on if we split the conference over 2 days. Also, we'd like to have some money left over to give to the speakers. Help us decide what to do by telling us:

How much would the conference be worth to you?
10 or less
10 to 20
20 to 30
30 to 40
40 to 50

Would you/your company be interested in sponsorship? If so, please leave a contact
No
Other:

What other conferences do you like to attend?
emBO++
KiCon
FOSDEM
SuperCon
ORConf
asicon
Designcon
latch-up
Other:

We're thinking of naming the conference 'OpenTapeout' do you have a better suggestion?
