# Draft Libre-SOC Chip article

Revisions / History:

* 11 May 2020 - version 2


**So much more is possible within this very small chip.  Not the fastest,
nor the most powerful but the most radical for a new piece of silicon
in the 21st century. The chip will be available to our members together
with the expertise to use it.**

The Libre-SOC project, with MarketNext, creates a first-of-its-kind
Libre-licensed CPU with built-in GPU (3D) and VPU (Video) capabilities. It
is open to anyone, any entrepreneur, anywhere in the world to extend
it to meet the needs of their local market. This market was previously
considered the realm of very large corporations only. Not having expertise
hasn’t been an obstacle to having the vision because MarketNext has
been able to provide very specific expertise to support this new member.

This chip can allow people to manufacture Smartphones, tablets &
notebooks, single board computers for all sorts of industrial, embedded
applications, entertainment devices, automotive & power management for
new electric vehicle designs, interactive kiosks, public information
systems, power and resource management. You can build intelligent
behavioural networks for electric vehicle recharging & power-grids.
One application could be to accelerate the evolution of the current
internet to be better suited to developing economies, and providing
access to management heuristics within that network.

It has been built so that countries and citizens regain Sovereign control
over their computing technology.  When the Quad-core version of the chip
is ready, its cost in volume will be around $4 (74 ZAR, 302 INR, £3.22).
It has a massive potential to change the status quo.  We accept at the
moment that things are manufactured in South Korea or China and then
distributed all over the world.  With Libre-SOC chips, suddenly, anybody
with a small workshop can create sophisticated computing devices with
much reduced legal and technical hurdles.  We are building expertise
which is valuable and we are inviting anyone to co-create empowering
opportunities for the people who use it.

New MarketNext member Luke Leighton conceived this design, and, with the
help of Mitch Alsup on the comp.arch newsnet group, got a crash-course
education in chip architecture.  Mitch is the designer of the Motorola
68000, 88120, AMD K9, AMD Opteron Series, and a lead architect on
Samsung's recent GPU. He is also one of the few people in the world
with working knowledge of the exceptionally powerful Cray CDC6600 -
the inspiration for this initiative's core engine.  Other invaluable
team members, Jacob Lifshay, Yehowshua Immanuel, Michael Nolan and more,
share the same goals and have been helping to make this chip a reality.

“We’re not trying to build the fastest", Luke said. "or the most
powerful computer processor ever. It is the most radical design.
It’s capable of a high degree of parallel processing.  Also it’s
the first ever Libre-licensed chip which has such a radical and
ambitious architecture, with an extended instruction set that makes GPU
instructions native.  This means that all video and 3D processing is
done far more efficiently inside the chip, dramatically simplifying
software drivers and end-user applications as a hugely beneficial
side-effect”.  Fundamentally, free open source software is better,
not just because it’s free as in free beer but also because it’s
free as in free and fair elections.  When a closed operation works,
their development cycle tends to go through big internal iterations and
the teams are contractually unable to talk to anyone.  The 3rd party
developers using that product who find errors and need help from the
company meet stone-cold brick walls in the form of NDAs and "support
contracts". With this design being conducted entirely in the open,
developers do not need to ask permission. They can download the drivers
and the full hardware design immediately. Mistakes are rectified faster,
more elegant solutions are incorporated earlier, the open design process
always creates better results which are more user & market friendly.

There is also an additional huge market for peripherals, interfaces,
environmental sensors, human interface devices including virtual reality
supported by future versions.  By 2022, we expect to mass-produce a
Quad Core 64-bit chip with a dual issue 800Mhz processor and a 320 pin
package for under $4.

Libre-SOC is a system which has grown from following Libre principles.
What it basically does is it extends the ethical FOSS (Free Open Source
Software) principles into hardware.  Presently you have to run open source
software on hardware such as Intel or Apple. When this chip exists there
will be no corporate stranglehold on any part of the whole stack.

This allows massive revenue transfer.  We open closed markets and create
product income for all members of the network closer to the point of use.
The astronomical revenues kept in tax havens by corporations can now be
shared by local communities all over the whole world.

Any patents will be based on the IBM patent pool concept, which is
royalty-free for any user unless that user asserts litigation detrimental
to other members of the user community.

So here is a system where MarketNext members can provide customer
services, legal service, marketing services and crucial technical
expertise.  Although we can’t have complete control over how an open
product is used, the core developers and MarketNext members, having
current know-how, are by default the logical best route and will have
first-mover advantage.

Within closed and proprietary systems, you have the so-called Peter
Principle where people are promoted into a role above their ability
and then they stay at that role, slightly above their ability.  In an
open system that can’t happen.  In an open project you are not
working with a project according to the abilities you had in the past.
You’re contributing according to your best assets right now and we
can avoid the massive mistake of closed systems.

For example: due to NDAs, proprietary and closed development teams
are prevented and prohibited from reaching out if they need outside
assistance.  Libre and Open Projects, never having signed an NDA, if
they need help, may ask on public forums such as comp.arch, immediately.
More than that: again, with no NDAs, and operating entirely in the
public eye, anyone may reach out, at any time, and volunteer their advice
and expertise.

It will be practical and usable.  We are doing this really fast because
sharing knowledge is key to our growth.  We hope to have our first device
ready for October 2020 as a proof of concept test chip. We already have
simulator builds and unit tests as part of the daily development plan.
By August this year, we aim to have an FPGA (Floating Point Gate Array)
build ready which is a hardware simulation and then we will really be
able to test it.  We will potentially have around 30 chips available for
testing on 180nm.  Those precious chips will be available to exclusive
and strategic partners willing to help us achieve this ambitious goal.

A simple way to understand how the Open Source model works is for
example with Linus Torvalds who was the spearhead of the Linux operating
system. He is available to anyone in the world to help with their Linux
project.  But it works fine without him.  He’s available for hire but
not for employment. Typically such founders will be involved in projects
which expand the use case and which extends the reach of the technology.
Because of the openness and the visibility of this development, that
expertise becomes available to more MarketNext members to share.

Libre-SOC has thrived by openly asking questions in public and receiving
amazing support.  The collaborators come so far from India, Russia, UK,
Iceland, Canada, USA, Germany, Belgium and Taiwan. Now that it’s part
of MarketNext we expect that collaboration to grow further.

There are many applications for this in the developing market and
advantages from removing reliance on expensive imported goods and being
able to manufacture more locally.  This chip will be available cheaply
to members and support and expertise will be available to members for
how to take this and make this core component which has never been
available before.

With Linux over the past few decades, there have been very stable incomes
from this free project from support, education and training. It powers
over 60% of all the worlds’ web servers.  Now these are the first steps
ever in creating an open hardware platform.  The potential applications
for this are highly expansive.

Whilst considerably simpler this creates more opportunity for those
in legal services, human resource consultancy, education, science &
engineering, public policy, and many other areas of our members interests.

