# Installing Coriolis2

TODO: include tasyagle <https://www-soc.lip6.fr/en/team-cian/softwares/tasyagle/>

Videos and links:

* <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TN9AQgoVwDw&list=PLj2N46Uqs4huGN-redGHVEILPz17OBu37&index=11>
* <http://coriolis.lip6.fr/>
* <https://gitlab.lip6.fr/vlsi-eda>

## Automated Installation - One-liner
The new automated method of installing/setting up Coriolis2 is as follows:

1. Clone the repo "dev-env-setup".
Tutorial assumes the directory is located under user's home.
1. Run the script "coriolis2-chroot" to create a new chroot environment,
and setup Coriolis2.
1. Once cgt window appears, go to File, Open Cell, and type chip_r.
1. You should now have a working Coriolis chroot!

In a terminal:

    $ cd ~/dev-env-setup
    $ sudo bash
    # ./coriolis2-chroot

And now you wait... (about 30-45min, depends on your CPU). 
I suggest occasionallly checking the status messages, 
especially after apt finished updating the packages and the script moves on 
to compiling yosys, coriolis2, alliance, as well as when 
alliance-check-toolkit generates the floorplan for you.

This is what the chip floorplan should look like:

[[!img chip_r_floorplan.png ]]

## Automated Installation - Separated Steps
The steps performed by "coriolis2-chroot" can be done manually and are:

1. Run the script "mk-deb-chroot" to create a chroot environment.
Tutorial assumes the name is "coriolis"
1. Run the script "cp-scripts-to-chroot" to copy the dev-env-setup directory 
over to your new chroot environment.
1. Login into the new scroot environment as a normal user 
(should be the same as your current user).
1. Run the script "coriolis-install"

In a terminal:

    $ cd ~/dev-env-setup
    $ sudo bash
    # ./mk-deb-chroot coriolis
    # ./cp-scripts-to-chroot coriolis

In a separate terminal as normal user:

    $ scroot -c coriolis
    (coriolis)$ cd ~/dev-env-setup
    (coriolis)$ ./coriolis-install

# Further Details

## Python3 Coriolis Support

A separate script will be written to use the latest development version of Coriolis2. 
For now however, a stable version is pulled in, which still uses Python2.

## Chroot/Jail Environment

See [[devscripts]] for explanation of the "mk-deb-chroot" script.

## Coriolis2 Setup

These are nominally taken from
<https://www-soc.lip6.fr/equipe-cian/logiciels/coriolis/>
however there are errors in the original at the moment.
Do not try qt5, it will not work.

In ~/.bash\_profile add the following so that builds (rebuilds) if you need
them will be quicker, and you can run the GUI from the chroot:

    export PATH=/usr/lib/ccache:"$PATH"
    export DISPLAY=:0.0

Second (or at a new terminal / xterm), log in as root on the host (not the chroot) then do schroot -c coriolis to get to be root in the chroot (or, you can install sudo in the chroot and then do "sudo bash" in the chroot).

Then run the following commands, as root, *in* the chroot:

    apt-get update
    apt-get install -y automake binutils-dev bison build-essential \
    ccache clang cmake doxygen dvipng flex gcc git graphviz \
    imagemagick libboost-all-dev libboost-python-dev libbz2-dev \
    libmpfr-dev libgmp-dev libmotif-dev libreadline-dev \
    libqwt-dev libtool libx11-dev libxaw7-dev libxml2-dev \
    libxpm-dev libxt-dev python3.7 python3-jinja2 python3-pip \
    python3-setuptools python-dev python-qt4 python-sphinx \
    qt4-dev-tools rapidjson-dev tcl tcl-dev tcl-tclreadline \
    texlive texlive-fonts-extra texlive-lang-french \
    texlive-latex-extra texlive-pictures xfig yosys zlib1g-dev

Then, as the ordinary (non-root) user in the schroot:

    mkdir -p ~/coriolis-2.x/src
    cd ~/coriolis-2.x/src
    git clone https://gitlab.lip6.fr/vlsi-eda/coriolis.git
    cd coriolis
    git checkout LS180_RC7_FINAL
    ./bootstrap/ccb.py --project=coriolis --make="-j$(nproc) install"

Note: Instead of "devel", "LS180_RC7_FINAL" is used as it is more stable.
Once Python3 support is added, can switch to using "devel".

To set up the coriolis2 environment, run this:

    eval `~/coriolis-2.x/src/coriolis/bootstrap/coriolisEnv.py`

For convenience that may be placed in a file and "sourced", to avoid
having to look this page up every time

    /bin/bash << EOF
    /home/$USER/coriolis-2.x/src/coriolis/bootstrap/coriolisEnv.py > /home/$USER/coriolisenv
    EOF
    source ~/coriolisenv

For now a workaround must be used for coriolisEnv.py to correctly detect the shell (Bash in this case).

## Testing coriolis2

To run the graphical editor go to the bin directory

    cd ~/coriolis-2.x/Linux.MyARCH/Release.Shared/install/bin
    ./cgt

Then run the following commands from the menubar

    Tutorials / Run Demo (Python Flavour)

If the following window appears you have an error.

[[!img chicken.png ]]

click on the chicken several times

If you have the following, congratulations:

[[!img demo_cell.png ]]

# Upgrading to latest yosys in the chroot

yosys in debian may not be enough to work with nmigen,
therefore it's probably a good idea to upgrade.

As root, in the chroot, run the following:

    apt-get update
    apt-get build-dep yosys
    apt-get install clang
    apt-get remove yosys

This will remove debian/buster yosys however getting the build dependencies is quick and easy enough.

As the ordinary user, the following instructions can be followed
(<http://www.clifford.at/yosys/download.html>)

    cd ~
    git clone https://github.com/cliffordwolf/yosys.git
    cd yosys
    git checkout 049e3abf9baf795e69b9ecb9c4f19de6131f8418
    make config-clang
    make -j$(nproc)

Note: For now a stable version of yosys is used!

As root, run:

    make install

## Alliance

Adapted from <https://www-soc.lip6.fr/en/team-cian/softwares/alliance/>

In the chroot, as the ordinary schroot user, in ~/.bash\_profile add the following so that builds (rebuilds, if you need them) will be quicker:

    export PATH=/usr/lib/ccache:"$PATH"

In the chroot, as the ordinary schroot user:

    mkdir -p alliance/build alliance/install
    cd ~/alliance
    git clone https://gitlab.lip6.fr/vlsi-eda/alliance.git
    mv alliance/alliance/src alliance
    rm -rf alliance/alliance
    cd alliance/src
    ./autostuff
    cd ~/alliance/build
    export ALLIANCE_TOP=$HOME/alliance/install
    export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${ALLIANCE_TOP}/lib:${LD_LIBRARY_PATH}
    export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${ALLIANCE_TOP}/lib64:${LD_LIBRARY_PATH}
    ../alliance/src/configure --prefix=$ALLIANCE_TOP --enable-alc-shared
    make -j1 install

The three exports are best added to ~/.bash_profile for later convenience

# Tutorials and checks

Install alliance-check-toolkit in the chroot:

* <https://gitlab.lip6.fr/vlsi-eda/alliance-check-toolkit.git>
* See coriolis-2.x/Linux.x86_64/Release.Shared/install/share/doc/coriolis2/en/html/main/PythonTutorial/index.html

Run the following (if not done already):

    source ~/coriolisenv

Git clone alliance-check-toolkit:

    git clone https://gitlab.lip6.fr/vlsi-eda/alliance-check-toolkit.git

You must create a configuration for your user in alliance-check-toolkit to define where the various tools are installed:

    touch alliance-check-toolkit/etc/mk/users.d/user-$USERNAME.mk
    cat <<EOF >>alliance-check-toolkit/etc/mk/users.d/user-$USERNAME.mk
    export CORIOLIS_TOP=/home/$USERNAME/coriolis-2.x/Linux.x86_64/Release.Shared/install
    export ALLIANCE_TOP=/home/$USERNAME/alliance/install
    export CHECK_TOOLKIT=/home/$USERNAME/alliance-check-toolkit
    export YOSYS_TOP=/home/$USERNAME/yosys
    EOF

You can try the user adder benchmark in alliance-check-toolkit:

    cd alliance-check-toolkit/benchs/adder/cmos
    make lvx

This should take about five minutes. It's symbolic, but should be a configuration compatible with 180nm. To actually see the results:

    make cgt

Then:

    Select File -> Open Cell or press CTRL + o

Enter as the cell name (without the single quotation marks):

    'chip_r'

As a very rough approximation, you can say that one lambda equals 180nm.

It depends on the zoom level and of the fact that you ask to see the inside of the cells.

To actually see the transistors:

    Tools -> Controller -> Filter Tab -> check "Process Terminal Cells"

You can also tweak the layer display by selecting:

    Tools -> Controller -> Layers & Go

  You can quicly hide/show the Controller with:

    CTRL+I

The up-to-date documentation is supplied directly in the Coriolis repository:

    coriolis/documentation/output/index.html

The links toward the doxygen doc will be invalid a this point, but everything else works.

After installation, it is put in:

    coriolis-2.x/Linux.x86_64/Release.Shared/install/share/doc/coriolis2/en/html/index.html

## More Information from Jean-Paul

There is a WIP documentation website for Alliance/Coriolis at <http://coriolis.lip6.fr/>.

There are also very cursory informations about installing Alliance here:
    https://www-soc.lip6.fr/en/team-cian/softwares/alliance/

You also have a third repository for various blocks/chip/examples here:
    https://gitlab.lip6.fr/jpc/alliance-check-toolkit

(with a basic doc under "doc/"...)

# Clone "soclayout" repository and place and route a layout experiment

In order to do the physical layout of the logical 
netlists generated by yosys we use coriolis and 
alliace installed above by doing the following 
(using experiment9 as an example):

    $ cd ~/src
    $ git clone https://git.libre-soc.org/git/soclayout.git
    $ cd soclayout/
    $ git submodule update --init --recursive
    $ find . -type f -exec sed -i 's/'lkcl'/'"$USER"'/g' {} \;
    $ ./mksym.sh
    $ cd experiments9
    $ ./mksym.sh
    $ yosys
    yosys> read_ilang test_issuer.il
    yosys> heirarchy -check -top test_issuer
    yosys> synth -top test_issuer
    yosys> dfflibmap -liberty /home/USERNAME/alliance/install/cells/sxlib/sxlib.lib
    yosys> abc -liberty /home/USERNAME/alliance/install/cells/sxlib/sxlib.lib
    yosys> clean
    yosys> write_blif test_issuer.blif
    yosys> exit
    $ make pinmux
    $ make layout (will take between 20min and 2 hours depending on your hardware)
    $ make view

A window should open with with contents that look like this (pretty isn't it?)

[[!img 180nm_Oct2020/2020-07-03_11-04.png size="825x" ]]

# Issues running from (e.g.) archlinux as host and debian as a chroot

You may run into difficulties firing up GUI applications from the chroot.
Try installing Xnest <https://box.matto.nl/xnest.html> which you should
do in the *host* system.  Also remember to install a "basic" window manager
(twm, fvwm2)

On the *host*, run Xnest and a window manager:

    Xnest :1 -ac &
    twm -display :1 &

Then, in the chroot, change DISPLAY environment variable (permanently
in ~/.bash_profile if desired)

    export DISPLAY=:1.0

Then, in the chroot, follow the cgt instructions above, or use "make view"
in any of the soclayout experiments or alliance-check-toolkit bench tests

# Libre-SOC 180nm ASIC reproducible build<a name="ls180_repro_build"></a>

Prerequisites:

* machine with debian/10 (or if you absolutely must, ubuntu)
* minimum 32 GB RAM
* minimum XEON processor or Intel i9 or IBM POWER9
* enough time to complete the build in full
* around 50 GB free space (this is more than enough)

**WARNING! DO NOT TRY RUNNING CORIOLIS2 IN QEMU OR OTHER VM!**
VLSI builds are far too CPU and memory intensive.

Follow these instructions to build the ls180 GDS-II files

* clone the dev-env-setup repository
* run the coriolis2-chroot script as root
* drop into the schroot
* navigate to the soclayout/experiments9 directory
* run the ./build_full_4k_sram.sh script
* run "make view" to see the results.

The FreePDK45 Chips4Makers FlexLib variant is slightly
different, in that it builds GDS-II rather than Alliance Symbolic
and so requires klayout to view the GDS-II. We do not yet
 have a build script for klayout, it will be in dev-env-setup
when it is.  In the meantime you can follow instructions
on the website <https://klayout.de/>

Please check these scripts before running them.
**This is your responsibility**.  Also as explained in
the [[HDL_workflow]] the standard OS for reproducible
builds is debian/10.  It is just about possible to use
ubuntu to run the debootstrap chroot setup but it is
not recommended.

Commands to run:

```
$ git clone https://git.libre-soc.org/git/dev-env-setup.git
$ cd dev-env-setup
$ sudo bash
# ./coriolis2-chroot
# exit
$ schroot -c cotiolis
$ cd soclayout/experiments9
$ ./build_full_4k_sram.sh
```
(now do something else for the next 90 minutes)

