# "Gaddie Pitch" (1) for LibreSOC

| What we do               | Benefits              | Feelings                |
| ------------------------ | --------------------- | ----------------------- |
| design high-performance  | No spying backdoors,  | Much less frustrated    |
| efficient and simpler    | greatly reduced time  | when developing products|
| processors with built-in | and cost to market    | using e.g. China-based  |
| 3D and Video capability  | Simpler debugging     | products.  End-customer |
| in a fully-transparent   | Full transparency     | stops complaining,      |
| fashion.                 | for their customers   | Risk and worry gone.    |

## You know how...

You know how for computers, you really have no idea how they work? And
how you keep having to replace them with upgrades?  Turns out that
it's very difficult for medium-sized businesses to design lower-cost products
because the only cheap processors (almost always from China) do not respect
Copyright law, provide almost zero documentation, and even Intel processors
are known to have spying backdoor co-processors in them?

## Well what we do is...

Well, what we do is: design 3D-capable efficient processors based on
full transparency.  All source code, right to the bedrock, hardware
and software.  We don't tell customers "trust us", we say "go have a
specialist audit the full source, independently".  If there's ever
some documentation missing, the customer can check for themselves when
designing *their* product around ours.

## In fact...

In fact, one customer that we're talking to is so fed up with a Chinese-based
$35 component that they are using in a $3000 product, where they are having
to spend considerable resources to *reverse-engineer* the China component,
they're willing to bet on our product even before we've
completed it, they believe in the approach and that our design can help
them out that much.

# "Gaddie Pitch" (1.5) for LibreSOC + EOMA68

## What we do

Design modular computing appliances based around "Computer Card" standards
where the "Computer Card" may be upgraded, swapped, shared, re-programmed,
re-purposed, and re-used.

## Benefits

Almost too numerous to describe.  Not just the right to repair: the right
to redesign and many more.  "Computer Card" has the data *and* the apps on
it, so goodbye file incompatibility: just move **the whole computer** from a
TV slot to a Laptop slot to a Tablet slot to a Desktop slot.  Also the cost
savings and environmental savings are enormous.  Keep the same $300 Laptop
"Housing" for 15 years, upgrade its parts over time, and not only buy a
new Computer Card for $30 every 2 years, keep the old one as a "spare",
give it to the kids, re-program it for watching Videos, the list is endless.

## Feelings

Every person we've spoken to, once they get around the confusion of the
idea of a "Computer" being inside a "Card" rather than "part of A Laptop",
has loved both the environmental as well as the cost savings.

# "Gaddie Pitch" (2) for LibreSOC

Cole TODO

