[[!tag oa_minutes]]

# Minutes
August 17, Tuesday

Discussion
Luke said if someone has already installed Ubuntu or Arch Linux in their system, it is ok. If not, he asked Debian 10 to be installed as it is preferred.
He insisted on using libre-soc-dev mailing list and IRC channel for private technical discussion. He said do not use WhatsApp or any other communication tools for private technical discussion because it will surprise the customers or the EU funding body and we lose privacy and enhanced trust.

For libera chat, no need to install anything, we can use a web browser.
Luke said he uses Hexchat.

Luke asked everyone to go through the Charter, if they are happy with it and send that in the mailing list, Luke will provide write access to the git repository, so that they can edit the Wiki by the git repository and git push will rebuild the Wiki page.

If they are not happy with it, they can send git patches.

After installing the Debian, one needs to run the dev-env-setup.git scripts and generate a ssh public key. By running the above scripts, it will be easy for them to use the verilator or coriolis2.

Luke asked everyone to fill in the details in the “https://libre-soc.org/about_us/” page, so that it will be easy and useful for him to find out their interests and what they have done and what they like to do and assign a task that is suited for them.

Luke talked about the meeting bots on IRC channel, which will write the MoM.
Luke has created a way for the MoM page.
Internet connection at home is not necessary to complete these projects.

Tasks to be completed by Friday, August 20:
1) Everybody has to join the libre-soc-dev mailing list
2) Everybody has to join the IRC channel and have two-way communication on the IRC client running.
3) Everyone needs to install Debian 10, if they have not already installed Ubuntu or Arch Linux.
4) After installing the OS, run the dev-env-setup.git scripts and generate a ssh public key.
5) Everyone needs to read and acknowledge the Charter.
6) Everyone needs to fill in the details in the “https://libre-soc.org/about_us/” page.






