# Augmented 6600-style Scoreboards

Images reproduced with kind permission from Mitch Alsup.  This page
describes *augmentations* made to 6600-style scoreboards for full,
precise, register-renaming (more accurately "nameless" register) capability
directly equivalent to the Tomasulo algorithm.  For
an explanation of the full functional-equivalence,
see [[tomasulo_transformation]].

# Notes and insights on Scoreboard design

btw one thing that's not obvious - at all - about scoreboards is: there's nothing that seems to "control" how instructions "know" to read, write, or complete.  it's very... weird.  i'll probably put this on the discussion page.

the reason i feel that the weirdness exists is for a few reasons:

* firstly, the Matrices create a Directed Acyclic Graph, using single-bit
  SR-Latches.  for a software engineer, being able to express a DAG using
  a matrix is itself.. .weird :)
* secondly: those Matrices preserve time *order* (instruction
  dependent order actually), they are not themselves dependent *on* time
  itself.  this is especially weird if one is used to an in-order system,
  which is very much critically dependent on "time" and on strict observance
  of how long results are going to take to get through a pipeline.  we
  could do the entire design based around low-gate-count FSMs and it would
  still be absolutely fine.
* thirdly, it's the *absence* of blocks that allows a unit to
  proceed.  unlike an in-order system, there's nothing saying "you go now,
  you go now": it's the opposite.  the unit is told instead, "here's the
  resources you need to WAIT for: go when those resources are available".
* fourth (clarifying 3): it's reads that block writes, and writes
  that block reads.  although obvious when thought through from first
  principles, it can get particularly confusing that it is the *absence*
  of read hazards that allow writes to proceed, and the *absence* of write
  hazards that allow reads to proceed.
* fifth: the ComputationUnits still need to "manage" the input and output
  of those resources to actual pipelines (or FSMs).
 - (a) the CUs are *not* permitted to blithely say, if there is an
    expected output that also needs managing "ok i got the inputs, now throw
    them at the pipeline, i'm done".  they *must* wait for that result.  of
    course if there is no result to wait for, they're permitted to indicate
"done" without waiting (this actually happens in the case of STORE).
 - (b) there's an apparent disconnect between "fetching of registers"
    and "Computational Unit progress".  surely, one feels, there should
    be something that, again, "orders the CU to proceed in a set, orderly
    progressive fashion?".  instead, because the progress is from the
    *absence* of hazards, the CU's FSMs likewise make forward progress from
  the "acknowledgement" of each blockage being dropped.
* sixth: one of the incredible but puzzling things is that register
  renaming is *automatically* built-in to the design.  the Function Unit's
  input and output latches are effectively "nameless" registers.
 - (a) the more Function Units you have, the more nameless registers
    exist.  the more nameless registers exist, the further ahead that
 in-flight execution can progress, speculatively.
 - (b) whilst the Function Units are devoid of register "name"
    information, the FU-Regs Dependency Matrix is *not* devoid of that
    information, having latched the read/write register numbers in an unary
    form, as a "row", one bit in each row representing which register(s)
    the instruction originally contained.
 - (c) by virtue of the direct Operand Port connectivity between the FU
    and its corresponding FU-Regs DM "row", the Function Unit requesting for
    example Operand1 results in the FU-Regs DM *row* triggering a register
    file read-enable line, *NOT* the Function Unit itself.
* seventh: the PriorityPickers manage resource contention between the FUs
  and the row-information from the FU-Regs Matrix.  the port bandwidth
  by nature has to be limited (we cannot have 200 read/write ports on
  the regfile).  therefore the connection between the FU and the FU-Regs
  "row" in which the actual reg numbers is stored (in unary) is even *less*
  direct than it is in an in-order system.

ultimately then, there is:

* an FU-Regs Matrix that, on a per-row basis, captures the instruction's
  register numbering (in unary, one SR-Latch raised per register per row)
  on a per-operand basis
* an FU-FU Matrix that preserves, as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG),
  the instruction order.  again, this is a bit-based system (SR Latches)
  that record which *read port* of the Function Unit needs a write result
  (when available), and which write port needs a *read* result.
* a suite of Function Units with input *and* output latches where the
  register information is *removed* (that being back in the FU-Regs row
  associated with a given FU)
* a PriorityPicker system that acknowledges the desire for access to the
  register file, and, due to the regfile ports being a contended resource,
  *only* permits one and only one FunctionUnit at a time to gain access to
  that regfile port.  where the FunctionUnit knows the Operand number it
  requires the input (or output) to come from (or to), it is the FU-Regs
  *row* that knows, on a per-operand-number basis, what the actual register
  file number is.

Note, again, that whilst academic literature focusses on the patent
(Q-Tables) it is only the *combination* of Q-Tables with the rest of
the algorithm, the PriorityPickers, FU-Regs and FU-FU Matrices,
that gives the capability to perform out-of-order execution.

# Example allocation of Function Units

This is the key diagram showing the relationship between Function Units
and the Register File(s), covering "read".  A similar diagram exists
for regfile "write".  Observe also that there are *two* Increment
Function Units.

The Dependency Matrices manage the DAG of read-write relationships:
each Function Unit indicates which registers it requires for read
and which it needs permission to write to.

NOTE: **AT NO TIME** is **any** Function Unit permitted "direct" access to
global resources by way of any form of "unmanaged" path.  Each Function
Unit may **only** receive incoming data and may **only** pass that data
out via the set determined path, as controlled by the Dependency Matrices.

Thus, the inputs for a given FU absolutely have to cover all resources
that the ALU will need.  In the case of POWER9, for the Integer Function
Units this is not just the Integer operands, it's the *Condition* operands
(CR0, XER carry bits etc.) that need to be inputs (and outputs) as well.
In the case of the Branch Function Unit, the input operands (and outputs)
will likewise be not just the Integer operands, but CTR, LR etc. as well.

In the arrangement below (from the CDC 6600), it can be observed that
there are actually separate Register Files (A, B and X).  Also observe
that whilst X goes to *all* Function Units as input, B only goes to
Branch, Increment and LongAdd, where A goes to Branch and the two Increment
Function Units.  Thus, A was 3R3W, B was 4R3W, and X was 5R4W.

An augmentation of this arrangement, for a modern processor using pipelines,
is, rather than have separate FSMs and doubled-up (or greater) Function Units
is to "double up" (or triple, or quadruple etc.) the number of Function
Units, but to *share the same pipeline*.  See "Concurrent Computation Unit"
section below for details.

[[!img multiple_function_units_write.svg]]
[[!img multiple_function_units_read.svg]]

# Modifications needed to Computation Unit and Group Picker

The scoreboard uses two big NOR gates respectively to determine when there
are no read/write hazards.  These two NOR gates are permanently active
(per Function Unit) even if the Function Unit is idle.

In the case of the Write path, these "permanently-on" signals are gated
by a Write-Release-Request signal that would otherwise leave the Priority
Picker permanently selecting one of the Function Units (the highest priority).
However the same thing has to be done for the read path, as well.

Below are the modifications required to add a read-release path that
will prevent a Function Unit from requesting a GoRead signal when it
has no need to read registers.  Note that once both the Busy and GoRead
signals combined are dropped, the ReadRelease is dropped.

Note that this is a loop: GoRead (ANDed with Busy) goes through
to the priority picker, which generates GoRead, so it is critical
(in a modern design) to use a clock-sync'd latch in this path.
The original 6600 used rising-edge and falling-edge of the clock
to avoid this issue.

[[!img comp_unit_req_rel-new.svg]]

[[!img group_pick_rd_rel.svg]]

[[!img priority_picker_16_yosys.png size="400x"]]

Source:

* [Priority Pickers](https://git.libre-riscv.org/?p=nmutil.git;a=blob;f=src/nmutil/picker.py;hb=HEAD)
* [ALU Comp Units](https://git.libre-riscv.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/experiment/compalu.py;h=f7b5e411a739e770777ceb71d7bd09fe4e70e8c0;hb=b08dee1c3e8cf0d635820693fe50cd0518caeed2)

# Concurrent Computational Unit

With the original 6600 having only a 2-stage pipelined FPU (which took
many years to notice from examining the now-archaic notation from James
Thornton's book, "Design of a Computer"), there is no actual use of this
pipeline capability at the front-end Function Unit.  Instead it is
treated effectively as a Finite State Machine, only one result to be
computed at a time.

Mitch Alsup recommends, when using pipelines, to allow multiple
Function Unit "front-ends", each one having inputs that were pushed
into a particular stage of the pipeline, and, therefore, those multiple
Function Units also track and store the result as it comes out.

The trick then is to have a method that ensures that FU front-end #1
can get result #1 when it pops out the end of the (serial) pipeline.
Mitch recommends using timing chains, here.

Note in this diagram that there are *multiple* ISSUE, GO\_READ and GO\_WRITE
signals.  These link up to the Function Unit's ISSUE, GO\_RD and GO\_WR,
where the latches are, that will (on an available slot) feed the pipeline
with incoming data.

[[!img concurrent_comp_unit.png size="600x"]]

The actual design being used is slightly different, in the following
ways:

* Due to micro-coding and thus external contention, the pipelines
  have a ready/valid signalling arrangement that can result in
  a stall cascading back down the pipeline.  Thus a timing chain
  is not appropriate.
* A decision was therefore made to pass a "context" alongside the
  operands, which is the "Function Unit Index".  It is *this* information
  that is used to "reassociate" the result with the correct FU, when
  the result is produced.
* With "Shadow cancellation" being in effect, *additional* global
  context is passed (combinatorially) to every single stage of the
  pipeline, as an unary bitmask.  If any Function Unit's "GO_DIE"
  signal is asserted, the corresponding bit in the unary mask is
  asserted, terminating effective immediate the intermediary data
  anywhere in the pipeline from progressing further, thus saving power.


# Multi-in cascading Priority Picker

Using the Group Picker as a fundamental unit, a cascading chain is created,
with each output "masking" an output from being selected in all down-chain
Pickers.  Whilst the input is a single unary array of bits, the output is
*multiple* unary arrays where only one bit in each is set.

This can be used for "port selection", for example when there are multiple
Register File ports or multiple LOAD/STORE cache "ways", and there are many
more devices seeking access to those "ports" than there are actual ports.
(If the number of devices seeking access to ports were equal to the number
of ports, each device could be allocated its own dedicated port).

Click on image to see full-sized version:

[[!img multi_priority_picker.png size="800x"]]

Links:

* [Priority Pickers](https://git.libre-riscv.org/?p=nmutil.git;a=blob;f=src/nmutil/picker.py;hb=HEAD)
* <http://lists.libre-riscv.org/pipermail/libre-riscv-dev/2020-March/005204.html>

# Modifications to Dependency Cell

Note: this version still requires CLK to operate on a HI-LO cycle.
Further modifications are needed to create an ISSUE-GORD-PAUSE ISSUE-GORD-PAUSE
sequence.  For now however it is easier to stick with the original
diagrams produced by Mitch Alsup.

The dependency cell is responsible for recording that a Function Unit
requires the use of a dest or src register, which is given in UNARY.
It is also responsible for "defending" that unary register bit for
read and write hazards, and for also, on request (GoRead/GoWrite)
generating a "Register File Select" signal.

The sequence of operations for determining hazards is as follows:

* Issue goes HI when CLK is HI.  If any of Dest / Oper1 / Oper2 are also HI,
  the relevant SRLatch will go HI to indicate that this Function Unit requires
  the use of this dest/src register
* Bear in mind that this cell works in conjunction with the FU-FU cells
* Issue is LOW when CLK is HI.  This is where the "defending" comes into
  play.  There will be *another* Function Unit somewhere that has had
  its Issue line raised.  This cell needs to know if there is a conflict
  (Read Hazard or Write Hazard).
* Therefore, *this* cell must, if either of the Oper1/Oper2 signals are
  HI, output a "Read after Write" (RaW) hazard if its Dest Latch (Dest-Q) is HI.
  This is the *Read_Pending* signal.
* Likewise, if either of the two SRC Latches (Oper1-Q or Oper2-Q) are HI,
  this cell must output a "Write after Read" (WaR) hazard if the (other)
  instruction has raised the unary Dest line.

The sequence for determining register select is as follows:

* After the Issue+CLK-HI has resulted in the relevant (unary) latches for
  dest and src (unary) latches being set, at some point a GoRead (or GoWrite)
  signal needs to be asserted
* The GoRead (or GoWrite) is asserted when *CLK is LOW*.  The AND gate
  on Reset ensures that the SRLatch *remains ENABLED*.
* This gives an opportunity for the Latch Q to be ANDed with the GoRead
  (or GoWrite), raising an indicator flag that the register is being
  "selected" by this Function Unit.
* The "select" outputs from the entire column (all Function Units for this
  unary Register) are ORed together.  Given that only one GoRead (or GoWrite)
  is guaranteed to be ASSERTed (because that is the Priority Picker's job),
  the ORing is acceptable.
* Whilst the GoRead (or GoWrite) signal is still asserted HI, the *CLK*
  line goes *LOW*.  With the Reset-AND-gate now being HI, this *clears* the
  latch.  This is the desired outcome because in the previous cycle (which
  happened to be when CLK was LOW), the register file was read (or written)

The release of the latch happens to have a by-product of releasing the
"reservation", such that future instructions, if they ever test for
Read/Write hazards, will find that this Cell no longer responds: the
hazard has already passed as this Cell already indicated that it was
safe to read (or write) the register file, freeing up future instructions
from hazards in the process.

[[!img dependence_cell_pending.jpg]]

# Shadowing

Shadowing is important as it is the fundamental basis of:

* Precise exceptions
* Write-after-write hazard avoidance
* Correct multi-issue instruction sequencing
* Branch speculation

Modifications to the shadow circuit below allow the shadow flip-flops
to be automatically reset after a Function Unit "dies".  Without these
modifications, the shadow unit may spuriously fire on subsequent re-use
due to some of the latches being left in a previous state.

Note that only "success" will cause the latch to reset.  Note also
that the introduction of the NOT gate causes the latch to be more like
a DFF (register).

[[!img shadow.svg]]

# LD/ST Computation Unit

Discussions:

* <http://lists.libre-riscv.org/pipermail/libre-riscv-dev/2020-April/006167.html>
* <https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/comp.arch/qeMsE7UxvlI>

Walk-through Videos:

* <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=idDn1norNl0>
* <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ipOe0cLOJWc>

The Load/Store Computation Unit is a little more complex, involving
three functions: LOAD, STORE, and LOAD-UPDATE.  The SR Latches create
a forward-progressing Finite State Machine, with three possible paths:

* LD Mode will activate Issue, GoRead1, GoAddr then finally GoWrite1
* LD-UPDATE Mode will *additionally* activate GoWrite2.
* ST Mode will activate Issue, GoRead1, GoRead2, GoAddr then GoStore.
  ST-UPDATE Mode will *additionally* activate GoWrite2.

These signals will be allowed to activate when the correct "Req" lines
are active.  Minor complications are involved (extra latches) that respond
to an external API interface that has a more "traditional" valid/ready
signalling interface, with single-clock responses.

Source:

* [LD/ST Comp Units](https://git.libre-riscv.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/experiment/compldst.py)

[[!img ld_st_comp_unit.jpg]]

# Memory-Memory Dependency Matrix

Due to the possibility of more than on LD/ST being in flight, it is necessary
to determine which memory operations are conflicting, and to preserve a
semblance of order.  It turns out that as long as there is no *possibility*
of overlaps (note this wording carefully), and that LOADs are done separately
from STOREs, this is sufficient.

The first step then is to ensure that only a mutually-exclusive batch of LDs
*or* STs (not both) is detected, with the order between such batches being
preserved.  This is what the memory-memory dependency matrix does.

"WAR" stands for "Write After Read" and is an SR Latch.  "RAW" stands for
"Read After Write" and likewise is an SR Latch.  Any LD which comes in
when a ST is pending will result in the relevant RAW SR Latch going active.
Likewise, any ST which comes in when a LD is pending results in the
relevant WAR SR Latch going active.

LDs can thus be prevented when it has any dependent RAW hazards active,
and likewise STs can be prevented when any dependent WAR hazards are active.
The matrix also ensures that ordering is preserved.

Note however that this is the equivalent of an ALU "FU-FU" Matrix.  A
separate Register-Mem Dependency Matrix is *still needed* in order to
preserve the **register** read/write dependencies that occur between
instructions, where the Mem-Mem Matrix simply protects against memory
hazards.

Note also that it does not detect address clashes: that is the responsibility
of the Address Match Matrix.

Source:

* [Memory-Dependency Row](https://git.libre-riscv.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/scoreboard/mem_dependence_cell.py;h=2958d864cec75480b97a0725d9b3c44f53d2e7a0;hb=a0e1af6c5dab5c324a8bf3a7ce6eb665d26a65c1)
* [Memory-Dependency Matrix](https://git.libre-riscv.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/scoreboard/mem_fu_matrix.py;h=6b9ce140312290a26babe2e3e3d821ae3036e3ab;hb=a0e1af6c5dab5c324a8bf3a7ce6eb665d26a65c1)

[[!img ld_st_dep_matrix.png size="600x"]]

# Address Match Matrix

This is an important adjunct to the Memory Dependency Matrices: it ensures
that no LDs or STs overlap, because if they did it could result in memory
corruption.  Example: a 64-bit ST at address 0x0001 comes in at the
same time as a 64-bit ST to address 0x0002: the second write will overwrite
all writes to bytes in memory 0x0002 thru 0x0008 of the first write,
and consequently the order of these two writes absolutely has to be
preserved.

The suggestion from Mitch Alsup was to use a match system based on bits
4 thru 10/11 of the address.  The idea being: we don't care if the matching
is "too inclusive", i.e. we don't care if it includes addresses that don't
actually overlap, because this just means "oh dear some LD/STs do not
happen concurrently, they happen a few cycles later" (translation: Big Deal)

What we care about is if it were to **miss** some addresses that **do**
actually overlap.  Therefore it is perfectly acceptable to use only a few
bits of the address.  This is fortunate because the matching has to be
done in a huge NxN Pascal's Triangle, and if we were to compare against
the entirety of the address it would consume vast amounts of power and gates.

An enhancement of this idea is to turn the length of the operation
(LD/ST 1 byte, 2 bytes, 4 or 8 bytes) into a byte-map "mask", using the
bottom 4 bits of the address to offset this mask and "line up" with
the Memory byte read/write enable wires on the underlying Memory used
in the L1 Cache.

Then, the bottom 4 bits and the LD/ST length, now turned into a 16-bit unary
mask, can be "matched" using simple AND gate logic (instead of XOR for
binary address matching), with the advantage that it is both trivial to
use these masks as L1 Cache byte read/write enable lines, and furthermore
it is straightforward to detect misaligned LD/STs crossing cache line
boundaries.

Crossing over cache line boundaries is trivial in that the creation of
the byte-map mask is permitted to be 24 bits in length (actually, only
23 needed).  When the bottom 4 bits of the address are 0b1111 and the
LD/ST is an 8-byte operation, 0b1111 1111 (representing the 64-bit LD/ST)
will be shifted up by 15 bits.  This can then be chopped into two
segments:

* First segment is 0b1000 0000 0000 0000 and indicates that the
  first byte of the LD/ST is to go into byte 15 of the cache line
* Second segment is 0b0111 1111 and indicates that bytes 2 through
  8 of the LD/ST must go into bytes 0 thru 7 of the **second**
  cache line at an address offset by 16 bytes from the first.

Thus we have actually split the LD/ST operation into two.  The AddrSplit
class takes care of synchronising the two, by issuing two *separate*
sets of LD/ST requests, waiting for both of them to complete (or indicate
an error), and (in the case of a LD) merging the two.

The big advantage of this approach is that at no time does the L1 Cache
need to know anything about the offsets from which the LD/ST came.  All
it needs to know is: which bytes to read/write into which positions
in the cache line(s).

Source:

* [Address Matcher](https://git.libre-riscv.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/scoreboard/addr_match.py;h=a47f635f4e9c56a7a13329810855576358110339;hb=a0e1af6c5dab5c324a8bf3a7ce6eb665d26a65c1)
* [Address Splitter](https://git.libre-riscv.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/scoreboard/addr_split.py;h=bf89e0970e9a8b44c76018660114172f5a3061f4;hb=a0e1af6c5dab5c324a8bf3a7ce6eb665d26a65c1)

[[!img ld_st_splitter.png size="600x"]]

# L0 Cache/Buffer

See:

* <https://bugs.libre-soc.org/show_bug.cgi?id=216>
* <https://bugs.libre-soc.org/show_bug.cgi?id=257>
* <http://lists.libre-riscv.org/pipermail/libre-riscv-dev/2020-April/006118.html>

The L0 cache/buffer needs to be kept extremely small due to it having
significant extra CAM functionality than a normal L1 cache.  However,
crucially, the Memory Dependency Matrices and address-matching
[take care of certain things](https://bugs.libre-soc.org/show_bug.cgi?id=216#c20)
that greatly simplify its role.

The problem is that a standard "queue" in a multi-issue environment would
need to be massively-ported: 8-way read and 8-way write.  However that's not
the only problem: the major problem is caused by the fact that we are
overloading "vectorisation" on top of multi-issue execution, where a
"normal" vector system would have a Vector LD/ST operation where sequences
of consecutive LDs/STs are part of the same operation, and thus a "full
cache line" worth of reads/writes is near-trivial to perform and detect.

Thus with the "element" LD/STs being farmed out to *individual* LD/ST
Computation Units, a batch of consecutive LD/ST operations arrive at the
LD/ST Buffer which could - hypothetically - be merged into a single
cache line, prior to passing them on to the L1 cache.

This is the primary task of the L0 Cache/Buffer: to resolve multiple
(potentially misaligned) 1/2/4/8 LD/ST operations (per cycle) into one
**single** L1 16-byte LD/ST operation.

The amount of wiring involved however is so enormous (3,000+ wires if
"only" 4-in 4-out multiplexing is done from the LD/ST Function Units) that
considerable care has to be taken to not massively overload the ASIC
layout.

To help with this, a recommendation from
[comp.arch](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/comp.arch/cbGAlcCjiZE)
came to do a split odd-even double-L1-cache system: have *two* L1 caches,
one dealing with even-numbered 16-byte cache lines (addressed by bit 4 == 0)
and one dealing with odd-numbered 16-byte cache lines (addr[4] == 1).
This trick doubles the sequential throughput whilst halving the bandwidth
of a drastically-overloaded multiplexer bus.
Thus, we can also have two L0 LD/ST Cache/Buffers (one each looking after
its corresponding L1 cache).

The next phase - task - of the L0 Cache/Buffer - is to identify and merge
any requests with the same top 5 bits.  This becomes a trivial task (under
certain conditions, already satisfied by other components), by simply
picking the first request, and using that row's address as a search
pattern to match against all upper bits (5 onwards).  When such a match
is located, then due to the job(s) carried out by prior components, the
byte-mask for all requests with the same upper address bits may simply be
ORed together.

This requires a little back-tracking to explain.  The prerequisite
conditions are as follows:

* Mask, in each row of the L0 Cache/Buffer, encodes the bottom 4 LSBs
  of the address **and** the length of the LD/ST operation (1/2/4/8 bytes),
  in a "bitmap" form.
* These "Masks" have already been analysed for overlaps by the Address
  Match Matrix: we **know** therefore that there are no overlaps (hence why
  addresses with the same MSBs from bits 5 and above may have their
  masks ORed together)

[[!img mem_l0_to_l1_bridge.png size="600x"]]

## Twin L0 cache/buffer design

See <https://groups.google.com/d/msg/comp.arch/cbGAlcCjiZE/OPNAvWSHAQAJ>.
[Flaws](https://bugs.libre-soc.org/show_bug.cgi?id=216#c24)
in the above were detected, and needed correction.

Notes:

* The flaw detected above is that for each pair of LD/ST operations
  coming from the Function Unit (to cover mis-aligned requests),
  the Addr[4] bit is **mutually-exclusive**.  i.e. it is **guaranteed**
  that Addr[4] for the first FU port's LD/ST request will **never**
  equal that of the second.
* Therefore, if the two requests are split into left/right separate L0
  Cache/Buffers, the advantages and optimisations for XOR-comparison
  of bits 12-48 of the address **may not take place**.
* Solution: merge both L0-left and L0-right into one L0 Cache/Buffer,
  with twin left/right banks in the same L0 Cache/Buffer
* This then means that the number of rows may be reduced to 8
* It also means that Addr[12-48] may be stored (and compared) only once
* It does however mean that the reservation on the row has to wait for
  *both* ports (left and right) to clear out their LD/ST operation(s).
* Addr[4] still selects whether the request is to go into left or right bank
* When the misaligned address bits 4-11 are all 0b11111111, this is not
  a case that can be handled, because it implies that Addr[12:48] will
  be **different** in the row.  This case throws a misaligned exception.

Other than that, the design remains the same, as does the algorithm to
merge the bytemasks.  This remains as follows:

* PriorityPicker selects one row
* For all rows greater than the selected row, if Addr[5:48] matches
  then the bytemask is "merged" into the output-bytemask-selector
* The output-bytemask-selector is used as a "byte-enable" line on
  a single 128-bit byte-level read-or-write (never both).

Twin 128-bit requests (read-or-write) are then passed directly through
to a pair of L1 Caches.

[[!img twin_l0_cache_buffer.jpg size="600x"]]

# Multi-input/output Dependency Cell and Computation Unit

* <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ohHbWRLDCfs>
* <https://youtu.be/H0Le4ZF0cd0>

apologies that this is best done using images rather than text.
i'm doing a redesign of the (augmented) 6600 engine because there
are a couple of design criteria/assumptions that do not fit our
requirements:

1. operations are only 2-in, 1-out
2. simultaneous register port read (and write) availability is guaranteed.

we require:

1. operations with up to *four* in and up to *three* out
2. sporadic availability of far less than 4 Reg-Read ports and 3 Reg-Write

here are the two associated diagrams which describe the *original*
6600 computational unit and FU-to-Regs Dependency Cell:

1. comp unit https://libre-soc.org/3d_gpu/comp_unit_req_rel.jpg
2. dep cell https://libre-soc.org/3d_gpu/dependence_cell_pending.jpg

as described here https://libre-soc.org/3d_gpu/architecture/6600scoreboard/
we found a signal missing from Mitch's book chapters, and tracked it down
from the original Thornton "Design of a Computer": Read_Release.  this
is a synchronisation / acknowledgement signal for Go_Read which is directly
analogous to Req_Rel for Go_Write.

also in the dependency cell, we found that it is necessary to OR the
two "Read" Oper1 and Oper2 signals together and to AND that with the
Write_Pending Latch (top latch in diagram 2.) as shown in the wonderfully
hand-drawn orange OR gate.

thus, Read-After-Write hazard occurs if there is a Write_Pending *AND*
any Read (oper1 *OR* oper2) is requested.


now onto the additional modifications.

3. comp unit https://libre-soc.org/3d_gpu/compunit_multi_rw.jpg
4. dep cell https://libre-soc.org/3d_gpu/dependence_cell_multi_pending.jpg

firstly, the computation unit modifications:

* multiple Go_Read signals are present, GoRD1-3
* multiple incoming operands are present, Op1-3
* multiple Go_Write signals are present, GoWR1-3
* multiple outgoing results are present, Out1-2

note that these are *NOT* necessarily 64-bit registers: they are in fact
Carry Flags because we are implementing POWER9.  however (as mentioned
yesterday in the huge 250+ discussion, as far as the Dep Matrices are
concerned you still have to treat Carry-In and Carry-out as Read/Write
Hazard-protected *actual* Registers)

in the original 6600 comp unit diagram (1), because the "Go_Read" assumes
that *both* registers will be read (and supplied) simultaneously from
the Register File, the sequence - the Finite State Machine - is real
simple:

* ISSUE  -> BUSY (latched)
* RD-REQ -> GO_RD
* WR-REQ -> GO_WR
* repeat

[aside: there is a protective "revolving door" loop where the SR latch for
 each state in the FSM is guaranteed stable (never reaches "unknown") ]

in *this* diagram (3), we instead need:

* ISSUE   -> BUSY (latched)
* RD-REQ1 -> GO_RD1     (may occur independent of RD2/3)
* RD-REQ2 -> GO_RD2     (may occur independent of RD1/3)
* RD-REQ3 -> GO_RD3     (may occur independent of RD1/2)
* when all 3 of GO_RD1-3 have been asserted,
  ONLY THEN raise WR-REQ1-2
* WR-REQ1 -> GO_WR1     (may occur independent of WR2)
* WR-REQ2 -> GO_WR2     (may occur independent of WR1)
* when all (2) of GO_WR1-2 have been asserted,
  ONLY THEN reset back to the beginning.

note the crucial difference is that read request and acknowledge (GO_RD)
are *all independent* and may occur:

* in any order
* in any combination
* all at the same time

likewise for write-request/go-write.

thus, if there is only one spare READ Register File port available
(because this particular Computation Unit is a low priority, but
the other operations need only two Regfile Ports and the Regfile
happens to be 3R1W), at least one of OP1-3 may get its operation.

thus, if we have three 2-operand operations and a 3R1W regfile:

* clock cycle 1: the first may grab 2 ports and the second grabs 1 (Oper1)
* clock cycle 2: the second grabs one more (Oper2) and the third grabs 2

compare this to the *original* 6600: if there are three 2-operand
operations outstanding, they MUST go:

* clock cycle 1: the first may grab 2 ports, NEITHER the 2nd nor 3rd proceed
* clock cycle 2: the second may grab 2 ports, 3rd may NOT proceed
* clock cycle 3: the 3rd grabs 2 ports

this because the Comp Unit - and associated Dependency Matrices - *FORCE*
the Comp Unit to only proceed when *ALL* necessary Register Read Ports
are available (because there is only the one Go_Read signal).


so my questions are:

* does the above look reasonable?  both in terms of the DM changes
  and CompUnit changes.

* the use of the three SR latches looks a little weird to me
  (bottom right corner of (3) which is a rewrite of the middle
  of the page.

  it looks a little weird to have an SR Latch looped back
  "onto itself".  namely that when the inversion of both
  WR_REQ1 and WR_REQ2 going low triggers that AND gate
  (the one with the input from Q of an SR Latch), it *resets*
  that very same SR-Latch, which will cause a mini "blip"
  on Reset, doesn't it?

  argh.  that doesn't feel right.  what should it be replaced with?

[[!img compunit_multi_rw.jpg size="600x"]]

[[!img dependence_cell_multi_pending.svg]]

# Corresponding FU-FU (Function-to-Function) Dependency Cell Modifications

* Video <https://youtu.be/_5fmPpInJ7U>

Original 6600 FU-FU Cell diagram:

[[!img fu_dep_cell_6600.jpg size="600x"]]

Augmented multi-GORD/GOWR 6600 FU-FU Cell diagram:

[[!img fu_dep_cell_multi_6600.jpg size="600x"]]

# FU-Regs Vectors

There are two FU-Regs Vectors.  The first is an accumulation of
all row information.  This indicates that (on a per-Operand basis
in the Libre-SOC design) there is *a* write pending for that Operand
(note that this is not per **register**, it is per **operand**).
Likewise, the OR-accumulation of every unary-encoded register SR-Latch
bit in the row, for reading for each FU's Operand, indicates a
desire of that Function Unit's need to *read* from a given port.

These accumulated signals, coming out on a per-row basis for each
Operand port, are sent straight to every cell in the corresponding
FU-FU Matrix row.

[[!img fu_regs_row_pending_vec.png size="600x"]]

The second vector set accumulates the **column** information.  With the
FU-Regs Cells capturing the instruction operand read/write register
numbers (in unary form), the ORing per column of those bits creates
a "global picture", per register, of the fact that *any* Function Unit
needs to read (or write) a particular Operand latch port.

[[!img fu_regs_global_pending_vec.png size="500x"]]

# FU-FU Vectors

Two vectors exist that accumulate row and column information.  With the
FU-FU Cell recording whether the Function Unit *wants* to read (or write)
the per-cell information is not so crucial as the *accumulation* of that
information.  When all other Function Units in that column no longer
indicate that they were waiting for a read, that FU is clear to **write**.
Correspondingly, when all FUs in the column no longer indicate waiting
for a write, that FU is clear to **read**.  With a full NxN matrix of
cells, this inversion preserves Read-after-Write and Write-after-Read
hazard information relationships between **all** Function Units and all
other Function Units.

[[!img fu_fu_readable_writeable.png size="500x"]]

