# IOcell

[[iopad.jpg]]

here is a list of requirements:

* pull-up control which switches in a 10k (50k?) resistor

* pull-down control which switches in a 10k (50k?) resistor

* a "mode" setting that flips it between Open-Drain (floating if
  LO, and pulled to GND if HI) and CMOS (MOSFET) Push-Push modes.
  see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_collector#MOSFET for details on
  Open Drain (requires a MOSFET).

* a "hysteresis" setting that controls the input schottky filter's
  sensitivity.  this is important for push-buttons for example,
  to stop spiking (bounce) that would be amplified and result in
  massive noise spikes onto all wires throughout that entire area
  of the chip.  low middle and high settings are needed to cover
  filtering ranges of say 2mhz, 5mhz, 10mhz and unlimited (disabling
  hysteresis).  looking at STM32F documentation helps here as does this
  https://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/156930/stm32-understanding-gpio-settings

* an input-enable selector

* an output-enable selector

* also required is a means to change the current output: 10mA, 20mA,
30mA and 40mA are reasonable

* also the input and output really need *automatic* level-shifting,
  built-in to the IO cell.  so whilst there is a VDD for driving the pad
  (and setting the CMOS threshold levels for input), there is *also* a need
  for an IO VREF.  this is *important*.  the input and output needs to be
  CMOS push-push (standard logic) whilst the IO pad needs to be switchable
  between OD and PP.

* input threshold voltages that trigger the input from HI to LO should
  be standard CMOS voltage levels (even in OD mode), which i believe is
  below 0.3 * VDD for "LO" and 0.7 * VDD for "HI"

* output voltage levels should be as close to 0 as possible for LO (0.3v
  or below @ nominal temperature) and as close to VDD as possible for HI
  (VDD-0.3v or above @ nominal temperature).

* some ability to protect itself from over-driving (current fights)
  when in output mode are a must.

* the ability to protect itself from *being* over-driven when in input
  mode is not strictly necessary (over-voltage tolerance e.g. 5V tolerance
  when VDD is well below that) but would be nice to have as an option
  (two variants: one for ECs which need 5V tolerance and one for SoCs
  where it's not).


