# Notes on Formal Proofs

If you study the ALU and SPR function unit directories, you'll find a set of formal proofs which I (Samuel A. Falvo II) found very confusing.
After some study of the ALU proofs, however, I've come to see some basic patterns.
Whether these patterns apply to other proofs throughout the rest of the code-base is unknown; I haven't gotten that far yet.
But, for now, this "cheat sheet" of sorts should help newcomers to the project better understand why these Python modules are structured the way they are.

In the discussion below, I'll be referring to the following URLs:

- [alu/formal/proof_main_stage.py](https://git.libre-soc.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/fu/alu/formal/proof_main_stage.py;hb=HEAD)
- [alu/main_stage.py](https://git.libre-soc.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/fu/alu/main_stage.py;h=719a9a731e4c9c5f637f574fbf01203fea36df28;hb=HEAD)

## Pipeline Stage Architecture

A pipeline stage appears to have the following overall architecture
(there will almost certainly be exceptions to this that I'm not familiar with).
(lkcl: no, there are absolutely none.  no exceptions.  at all.  this is
because there is a defined API):

               (from previous stage)
           OpSubset        Operand Inputs (originally from Register File)
              |                   |
              V                   V
           +-------------------------+
           | Pipeline Stage          |
           +-------------------------+
              |                   |
              V                   V
           OpSubset        Result Outputs
        (to next stage / register file logic)

Note that the **Pipeline Stage** is *purely combinatorial logic.*
(lkcl: yes.  this is noted in the pipeline API, see
<https://git.libre-soc.org/?p=nmutil.git;a=blob;f=src/nmutil/stageapi.py;hb=HEAD>)
Any state between pipeline stages is instantiated through mechanisms not disclosed here.
(IIRC, that logic is located in the `nmutil` package, but my memory is hazy here.)
(lkcl: in the pipeline API.  see stageapi.py).

## class Driver

The `Driver` class is an `Elaboratable` class (an `nmigen` module)
which specifies all the properties that the module under test
(in this case, `ALUMainStage`)
must satisfy to be considered "correct."


### `__init__`

The `__init__` method is the constructor for the class.
It prevents `Elaboratable`'s constructor from running.
(lkcl: not quite)
It's not yet clear to me why this is done.
(lkcl: because whitequark found that people were forgetting to add an
elaborate function, and wondering why their code failed to work).

### `elaborate` method

Bluntly, this method is (depending on what you're familiar with) a
macro or a monad.  Its job is to build a *description* of the final
output module by appending various objects to `comb`.  In this case,
the module's job is to specify the correct behavior of a production
submodule, `ALUMainStage`.  This is fairly basic `nmigen` material,
so I won't spend any more time on this.

#### `CompALUOpSubset`

`CompALUOpSubset` is, ultimately, an `nmigen`
[record](https://gitlab.com/nmigen/nmigen/blob/master/nmigen/hdl/rec.py#L89)
which contains a number of fields related to telling the pipeline stage
*what to do* and providing all the information it needs in order *to*
"do".  (Hence the *Op* in the class name.)  I won't disclose
the fields here, because they're liable to change at any time.  What is
important to know here is that this record exists for one purpose: to
ensure that when the interface to the ALU pipeline stage changes for
any reason, *all* consumers of that interface are updated consistently.

Because this is a record, its fields may be introspected.  This happens
frequently: it is the case that an Op-type record is passed
unchanged from stage to stage.  However, `nmigen` does not seem to support
testing records for equality in formal assertions.  (lkcl: it does) To
express this constraint without needing to update a pile of use-sites
every time the interface changes, you'll find logic
[like this](https://git.libre-soc.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/fu/alu/formal/proof_main_stage.py;h=5e70d1e885b41ca50d69f57e9ee94b568d001c2e;hb=HEAD#l64).

(lkcl: which has been established why:
<https://bugs.libre-soc.org/show_bug.cgi?id=429#c3> and it is down
to FPPipeContext not being a Record, but its member variable - op -
*is* a Record).

**NOTE:** Instantiating one of these records
(lkcl: FPPipeContext is not a Record, see above)) *does not* provide
these inputs to the module under test.  It merely makes the fields of
this record available to the formal verification solver so it can fiddle
the bits as it explores the design space.  The record must be connected
directly to the module via a signal assignment:
[see line 62 of the source listing.](https://git.libre-soc.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/fu/alu/formal/proof_main_stage.py;h=5e70d1e885b41ca50d69f57e9ee94b568d001c2e;hb=HEAD#l62)

          comb += dut.i.ctx.op.eq(rec)

#### `ALUPipeSpec`

`ALUPipeSpec` is a similar construct, but it serves a different role than the above class.
Looking at its
[source code](https://git.libre-soc.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/fu/alu/pipe_data.py;h=71363049ba5a437a708e53dfbc3370f17aa394d1;hb=HEAD)
, it appears to define bits in one or more *register files*,
for both input input the stage and output from the stage.

     class ALUPipeSpec(CommonPipeSpec):
         regspec = (ALUInputData.regspec, ALUOutputData.regspec)
         opsubsetkls = CompALUOpSubset

This structure is passed to the constructor of the module-under-test.
That constructor, ultimately, has the effect of creating a set of
inputs (`dut.i`) and outputs (`dut.o`) that matches the register field
names.

See [lines 9 (input) and 19 (output) of the source listing](https://git.libre-soc.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/fu/alu/pipe_data.py;h=71363049ba5a437a708e53dfbc3370f17aa394d1;hb=HEAD).

     class ALUInputData(IntegerData):
         regspec = [('INT', 'ra', '0:63'), # RA
                    ('INT', 'rb', '0:63'), # RB/immediate
                    ('XER', 'xer_so', '32'), # XER bit 32: SO
                    ('XER', 'xer_ca', '34,45')] # XER bit 34/45: CA/CA32
         def __init__(self, pspec):
             super().__init__(pspec, False)
             # convenience
             self.a, self.b = self.ra, self.rb

     class ALUOutputData(IntegerData):
         regspec = [('INT', 'o', '0:63'),
                    ('CR', 'cr_a', '0:3'),
                    ('XER', 'xer_ca', '34,45'), # bit0: ca, bit1: ca32
                    ('XER', 'xer_ov', '33,44'), # bit0: ov, bit1: ov32
                    ('XER', 'xer_so', '32')]
         def __init__(self, pspec):
             super().__init__(pspec, True)
             # convenience
             self.cr0 = self.cr_a

**NOTE:** these are actually separate and distinct registers!
For example, the POWER XER register defines two carry bits at positions
34 and 45 in a 64-bit word.  However, when referencing these bits via
`dut.i.xer_ca`, they occupy bits 0 and 1.  The process reverses for
outputs; bits 0 and 1 of the `dut.o.xer_ca` field have to be re-distributed
to XER register bits 34 and 45 again.

It is the responsibility of any pipelines to **understand and respect
this subdivision**.  For example, in the
[SPR main_statge.py at lines 78 to 86](https://git.libre-soc.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/fu/spr/main_stage.py;h=f4261b62a2b2d104c9edfa88262f27a97d9498a3;hb=HEAD#l76)
the implementation of PowerISA `mfspr` *manually* copies the XER `so`,
`ov/32` and `ca/32` bits into the output, based on hard-coded explicit
knowledge inside this code, of their positions.

            # XER is constructed
            with m.Case(SPR.XER):
                # sticky
                comb += o[63-XER_bits['SO']].eq(so_i)
                # overflow
                comb += o[63-XER_bits['OV']].eq(ov_i[0])
                comb += o[63-XER_bits['OV32']].eq(ov_i[1])
                # carry
                comb += o[63-XER_bits['CA']].eq(ca_i[0])
                comb += o[63-XER_bits['CA32']].eq(ca_i[1])

Note that
[Microwatt](https://github.com/antonblanchard/microwatt/blob/master/execute1.vhdl#L831)
does exactly the same thing:

            if decode_spr_num(e_in.insn) = SPR_XER then
                -- bits 0:31 and 35:43 are treated as reserved
                -- and return 0s when read using mfxer
                result(63 downto 32) := (others => '0');
                result(63-32) := v.e.xerc.so;
                result(63-33) := v.e.xerc.ov;
                result(63-34) := v.e.xerc.ca;
                result(63-35 downto 63-43) := "000000000";
                result(63-44) := v.e.xerc.ov32;
                result(63-45) := v.e.xerc.ca32;
            end if;

#### Instantiating the Module Under Test

Looking at [line 41 through 54](https://git.libre-soc.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/fu/alu/formal/proof_main_stage.py;h=5e70d1e885b41ca50d69f57e9ee94b568d001c2e;hb=HEAD#l41),
we see the module we want to test actually instantiated.

          m.submodules.dut = dut = ALUMainStage(pspec)

Since register inputs and outputs are frequently accessed, it's worthwhile
defining a set of aliases for those signals.

          # convenience variables
          a = dut.i.a
          b = dut.i.b
          ca_in = dut.i.xer_ca[0]   # CA carry in
          ca32_in = dut.i.xer_ca[1] # CA32 carry in 32
          so_in = dut.i.xer_so      # SO sticky overflow

          ca_o = dut.o.xer_ca.data[0]   # CA carry out
          ca32_o = dut.o.xer_ca.data[1] # CA32 carry out32
          ov_o = dut.o.xer_ov.data[0]   # OV overflow
          ov32_o = dut.o.xer_ov.data[1] # OV32 overflow32
          o = dut.o.o.data

Although this somewhat obscures the intent of the code,
it will save typing which reduces opportunity for error.

Lines 56 through 62 connect all the input signals of the submodule to
the formal verifier.

          # setup random inputs
          comb += [a.eq(AnyConst(64)),
                   b.eq(AnyConst(64)),
                   ca_in.eq(AnyConst(0b11)),
                   so_in.eq(AnyConst(1))]

#### Properties

Starting at [line 64](https://git.libre-soc.org/?p=soc.git;a=blob;f=src/soc/fu/alu/formal/proof_main_stage.py;h=5e70d1e885b41ca50d69f57e9ee94b568d001c2e;hb=HEAD#l64)
we find the start of properties which must apply to the submodule.

