# mvendorid/marchid WARL <a name="mvendor_marchid_warl"></a>

This proposal is to make the mvendorid and marchid CSRs have WARL (writeable)
characteristics as a means and method of providing RISC-V implementations
with a way to support multiple binary instruction encodings simultaneously
within the same processor.  Each unique tuple (including on a per-hart
basis) uniquely identifies and permits switch-over
to a completely separate and distinct binary-encoding such that:

* Different versions (legacy and new) of the RISC-V Standard may be
  supported within the same processor
* The fight over the extremely limited custom opcode space ends (permanently)
* Entirely foreign ISA may be supported within the same processor
  (actually executed: i.e. not the same thing at all as the JIT Extension).

For instances where mvendorid and marchid are readable, that would be
taken to be a Standards-mandatory "declaration" that the architecture
has *no* Custom Extensions (and that it conforms precisely to one and
only one specific variant of the RISC-V Specification).

Beyond that, the change is so simple and straightforward that there is not
much to discuss aside from its feasibility and its implications.  The
main considerations are:

* State information.  How is state to be handled?
* Compliance.  What impact does the change have on Compliance (and testing)?
* Implementation.  Is it feasible and practical?
* Exception-handlling.  What happens during a trap?
* Backwards compatibility.  Is the change zero-impact (for existing systems)
* Forwards compatibility.  Does the change affect (limit) future hardware?

## State information

Unlike with MISA (which can be used to completely switch off - i.e. power
down) certain Extensions, state information is **not permitted to be
altered or destroyed** during or by a switch-over.  Switch-over to a different
mvendorid-marchid tuple shall have the effect of *purely* disabling certain
instruction encodings and enabling others.

Note also that during (for example) standard OS context-switching *all*
state of *all* enabled extensions (and variants of the Base Standards) related
to *all* mvendorid-marchid tuples will need to be saved onto the stack,
given that a hart may, at any time, switch between any available
mvendorid-marchid tuples.

In other words there is absolutely zero connection *of any kind whatsoever*
between the "encoding switching" and the state or status of the Extensions
that the binary encodings are being directed *at* (on any upcoming
conflicting instruction encodings).  If a program requires the enablement
or disablement of an Extension it **uses MISA and other official methods
to do so** that have **absolutely nothing to do with what mvendorid-marchid
is presently enabled**.

## Compliance

It was pointed out early in the discussions that Compliance Testing may
**fail** any system that has mvendorid/marchid as WARL.  This however is a
clear case of "Compliance Tail Wagging Standard Dog".  However it *was*
recognised that overly complex Compliance Testing would result
in rejection of the entire RISC-V Standard.

A simple solution is to modify the Compliance Test Suite to specify the
required mvendorid/marchid to be tested, as a parameter to the test
applications.  The test can be run multiple times, providing the
implementor with multiple Compliance Certificates for the same processor,
against *different variants* of past, present and future RISC-V Standards.

*This is clearly a desirable characteristic*

It's been noted that there may be certain legitimate cases where
a mvendorid-marchid should *specifically* not be tested for RISC-V
Certification Compliance: native support for foreign architectures (not
related to the JIT Extension: *actual* full entire non-RISC-V foreign
instruction encoding).  Exactly how this would work (vis-a-vis Compliance)
needs discussion, as it would be unfortunate and undesirable for a hybrid
processor capable of executing more than one hardware-level ISA support
to not be permitted to receive RISC-V Certification Compliance.

How such foreign architectures would switch back to RISC-V when the foreign
architecture does not support the concept of mvendorid-marchid is out of
scope and left to implementors to define and implement equivalent
functionality.

## Implementation

The redirection of meaning of certain binary encodings to multiple
engines was considered extreme, eyebrow-raising, and also (importantly)
potentially expensive, introducing significant latency at the decode
phase.

However, it was observed that MISA already switches out entire
sets of instructions (interacts at the "decode" phase).  The difference
between what MISA does and the mvendor/march-id WARL idea is that whilst
MISA only switches instruction decoding on (or off), the WARL idea
*redirects* encoding, effectively to *different* simultaneous engines,
fortunately in a deliberately mutually-exclusive fashion.

Implementations would therefore, in each Extension (assuming one separate
"decode" engine per Extension), simply have an extra (mutually-exclusively
enabled) wire in the AND gate for any given binary encoding, and in this
way there would actually be very little impact on the latency.  The assumption
here is that there are not dozens of Extensions vying for the same binary
encoding (at which point the Fabless Semi Company has other much more
pressing issues to deal with that make resolving binary encoding conflicts
trivial by comparison).

Also pointed out was that in certain cases pipeline stalls could be introduced
during the switching phase, if needed, just as they may be needed for
correct implementation of (mandatory) support for MISA.

## Exception Handling (traps) and context-switching

In cases where mvendorid and marchid are WARL, the mvendorid-marchid
becomes part of the execution context that must be saved (and switched
as necessary) just like any other state / CSR.

When any trap exception is raised the context / state *must not* be
altered (so that it can be properly saved, if needed, by the exception
handler) and that includes the current mvendorid-marchid tuple.  This
leads to some interesting situations where a hart could conceivably be
directed to a set of trap handler binary instructions that the current
mvendorid-marchid setting is incapable of correctly interpreting.

To fix this it will be necessary for implementations (hardware /
software) to set up separate per-mvendorid-marchid trap handlers and
for the hardware (or software) to switch to the appropriate trap "set"
when the mvendorid-marchid is written to.  The switch to a different
"set" will almost undoubtedly require (transparent) **hardware** assistance.

The reason for requiring hardware-assist for switching exception
handling tables is because it has to be done atomically: there cannot
be a situation where just as a hart is switching to a different
mvendorid-marchid tuple an exception occurs, resulting in execution of
effectively foreign instructions.

In essence this means that mtvec needs to be a multi-entry table, one
per (mvendorid-marchid) tuple.  Likewise stvec, and bstvec.

## Backwards-compatibility

Backwards compatibility is vital for Standards.  There are two aspects
to this:

* The actual change to the Standard should be minimally-disruptive
* There should be no interference between two different encodings
  (any two separate tuples).

Given that mvendorid and marchid are presently read-only; given that
the change is to the *wording* and does not add any new CSRs; the change
can clearly be seen to be zero-impact, with the exception being to
implementors that have Custom Extensions in silicon at the moment.

On the second point: the *entire purpose* of the change is to provide
globally world-wide irrevocable permanent distinction and separation
between instruction encodings!

## Forwards-compatibility

Forwards compatibility is again vital for Standards.  Standards are required
to adapt, yet at the same time provide a means and method of identifying
and separating older (and legacy) systems from present and future versions.

The clear separation which mutually-exclusively redirects encodings based
on which mvendorid-marchid tuple is currently active clearly meets that
requirement.

# How the "custom extension conflict" is solved

* Vendor 1 produces a Custom Extension
* Vendor 2 produces a Custom Extension
* Both Custom Extensions have conflicting binary encodings.
* Fabless Semi Company 1 licenses both Vendor 1 and 2 Custom Extensions
* Fabless Semi Company 1 sets marchid=0xeee1 WARL to represent
  enabling Vendor 1's conflicting encoding
* Fabless Semi Company 1 sets marchid=0xeee2 WARL to represent
  enabling Vendor 2's conflicting encoding
* Fabless Semi Company 1 contacts the FSF, submitting patches to gcc
  (and likewise with binutils) to register
  (mvendorid=fabless1,marchid=0xeee1) to be added to the global
  (FSF-curated?) database for Vendor 1's instruction encoding.
* Likewise for Vendor 2's instruction encoding.

Note that the RISC-V Foundation is **not** involved (or consulted) in
this process.  The **FSF** (as the Copyright holder of gcc and binutils)
inherently and implicitly becomes the de-facto atomic arbiter in control
of the registration of Custom Extension instruction encodings.

The FSF's "job" is however quite straightforward: ensure that all
registrations are in fact unique.  It would be absolutely no good if a
Vendor decided to re-use two mvendorid-marchid tuples to mean two
totally different sets of instructions needed to be enabled!  Any
Vendor attempting to do so should be red-flagged immediately.

Situations in which the FSF receives requests for patches with
*another fabless semiconductor company's* mvendorid should also be treated
with suspicion, at the very least being queried as to why one fabless semi
company is trying to encroach on another company's JEDEC-registered
encoding space.

The special case of the above is when a fabless semiconductor company
implements a new version of the RISC-V Standard.  Here, again, the
fabless semi company will provide patches to gcc and binutils, requesting
that their specific mvendorid-marchid tuple be added to the (inherently
de-facto atomic arbitrated) global database for that particular RISC-V
Standard "Variant".

# Questions to be resolved

* Can the declaration (meaning) of read-only be expanded to cover
  any number of (non-conflicting) Custom Extensions?  What are the
  implications of doing so?
